
SEARCH
Fox Weather
The FOX Weather App
LEARN MORE
Fox Weather App on an iPhone, Fox Weather logo overlapping
Watch Live
Weather News
How to Watch
Extreme Weather
Learn
Local Weather
Earth & Space
Lifestyle
Video
America's Weather Team
Podcast
WEATHER NEWS Published April 1, 2024 4:51pm EDT
Scenic California Highway 1 collapse traps 1,600 after atmospheric river rain
Several resorts and state parks line the remote strech of coastal highway about 100 miles south of San Francisco.
By Hillary AndrewsSource FOX Weather
Facebook
Twitter
Email
Copy Link
Caltrans crews are working to repair part of Highway 1 in Monterey, California after an area of the highway slipped out following heavy rains. Caltrans District 5 spokesperson Kevin Drabinski tells FOX Weather what teams are doing to repair the road. 
03:49
Heavy rain washes out Highway 1 in California
Caltrans crews are working to repair part of Highway 1 in Monterey, California after an area of the highway slipped out following heavy rains. Caltrans District 5 spokesperson Kevin Drabinski tells FOX Weather what teams are doing to repair the road. 

BIG SUR, Calif. – Part of California's scenic Highway 1 crumbled into the sea below after the Easter weekend atmospheric river storm, trapping about 1,600 visitors and residents.

After heavy rain Saturday afternoon, half of the southbound lane after the Rocky Creek Bridge collapsed. According to the California Department of Transportation, crews closed both directions for 44 miles until engineers could assess the damage. That rain was preceded by 2-4 inches that fell on Friday.

The remote road along the coastal cliff has very few connecting roads for miles and miles. Any residents and visitors taking advantage of the three-day weekend were trapped.


Part of Highway 1 through Big Sur collapsed on Saturday after heavy rain.

(Caltrans / FOX Weather)

"We are working on a plan to get motorists evacuated from the area," the California Highway Patrol said in a statement on Saturday.

One couple told KTVU FOX 2 that they were visiting from the L.A. area to camp. They drove out for a hike leaving their gear behind, but couldn't get back to it or return home for a back-to-work Monday.

"Luckily, we have flexible jobs," Ian Dibruno said. "So we let them know we had a minor emergency situation." 


Part of Highway 1 through Big Sur collapsed on Saturday after heavy rain.

(Caltrans / FOX Weather)

"Big Sur serves a big tourist destination. There were many people who had traveled on this stretch of road south down to Big Sur. Then they had this closure, and they were just wearing that light sweater and weren't prepared in any way to return, they weren't prepared to stay the night," Kevin Drabinski of Caltrans told FOX Weather on Monday.

Caltrans opened the northbound lane on Sunday to allow officers to escort some of those stranded through the damaged area. About 300 cars were lined up for the first northbound trip, local media reported.


A convoy heading northbound.

(Caltrans / FOX Weather)

"(Engineering and geotech crews) did an inspection of the roadway," said a California Highway Patrol officer during a press conference. "It was very pleasant to discover that the erosion beneath the roadway had remained in place from where it  was the night before.  So it was static, and it hadn't continued to erode into the northbound lane, which was a grave concern for us."


Part of Highway 1 through Big Sur collapsed on Saturday after heavy rain.

(Caltrans / FOX Weather)

Monday, officials started a convoy at 8 a.m., and another at 4 p.m., to lead a line of cars first northbound for an hour, then southbound. Any threat of rain leading to further damage will cancel the convoy.

Engineers will continue to monitor the stretch of roadway for the next several days during the convoys to determine the next steps. There is no estimated time for reopening the roadway. Caltrans is working on plans to temporarily stabilize the roadway to open it while a permanent structural solution is being debated.

All state parks in the area have been closed, and camping reservations have been canceled. 

Tags
WINTER WEATHER
CALIFORNIA
FLOOD
TRAVEL
TRANSPORTATION
SAFETY
HOLIDAYS
LIFESTYLE
GEOLOGY
EXTREME WEATHER
Download the FOX Weather App
Available on iOS & Android
Latest Weather News
Damaging hail, wind reported as severe weather hammers nation's heartland
Damaging hail, wind reported as severe weather hammers nation's heartland
8 mins ago
Storm tracker follows storms in nation's heartland
03:17
Storm tracker follows storms in nation's heartland
57 mins ago
Total solar eclipse forecast shows who has best chance for clear skies on April 8th
Total solar eclipse forecast shows who has best chance for clear skies on April 8th
Tracking where clouds could block view of total solar eclipse
01:56
Tracking where clouds could block view of total solar eclipse
Dangerous storms erupt in central US
04:11
Dangerous storms erupt in central US
Fox Weather
About the App New Privacy Policy Terms and Conditions Your Privacy Choices Media Relations Corporate Information Help
Facebook
 
Twitter
 
Instagram
 
Youtube
 
LinkedIn
 
TikTok
 
RSS
Download on the App Store
Get it on Google Play
This material may not be published, broadcast, rewritten, or redistributed. ©2024 FOX News Network, LLC. All rights reserved.